---
layout:     post
title:      "Courting Controversy"
subtitle:   "Publicity at a price"
date:       2014-12-17 14:00:00 -0500
author:     "Wisq"
header-img: "img/2014/12/hatred.jpg"
---

Two months ago, we saw the first trailer for *Hatred*.  It features a faceless, nameless video game protagonist (his very first words: "my name is not important") going on an ultra-violent killing spree, ostensibly for no reason other than extreme misanthropy.

Civilians flee in terror but are mercilessly slaughtered, either *en masse* or up close in person.  A downed man gets his head blown off by a shotgun, a pleading woman is executed via a gun placed in her mouth, and several people are stabbed repeatedly.

Naturally, this caused a bit of a stir.  Some condemned it as terrible and revolting.  Some championed it as a rejection of political correctness and tried to link it to the ongoing GamerGate mess.  Some of us just got a good chuckle out of the sheer juvenility of it all — after all, we haven't really had a good "shock rock" band to laugh at since the 1990s.

And then yesterday, Valve declared that it wouldn't publish *Hatred* on Steam, and cancelled the project's Steam Greenlight campaign.

… for one day.  They've since reinstated it, but nobody expected them to, and it took them long enough that there was plenty of time to judge the internet's reaction, and for me to judge and question my own.

## Valve wide open

Now, from what I've seen, it's pretty rare that Valve actually steps in and removes a game.  They want to be a broker, not a curator.  The Greenlight system exists only to direct their efforts most effectively — if you gather enough interest from the community, you get scooped off the top and put on the store with everyone else.

In the rare cases where I've seen Valve remove a game, it's usually due to irreconcilable disagreements with the developer (e.g. breach of contract, [tweeting death threats at Valve's CEO][death-threats], etc.), or due to false advertising leading to mass refund requests.  Even then, they'll usually just suspend sales until the developer resolves the problem.

But removing a game for reasons of theme?  Practically unheard of.  As in, I'd never heard of them doing that, ever.

Like most people, I was initially concerned by the news.  It's not that I have any urge to play *Hatred*, and it's certainly not because of any misguided notion of "free speech" or "censorship" or it being "banned" — it's their store, they can do what they want.

Rather, I wondered: **Why now?**

Valve is the gatekeeper to the biggest digital distribution platform the world has ever known.  Until this moment, the rules seemed simple: *"If you build it, they will come … and when they do, we'll sell it on Steam."*  As a game developer, your only challenge is to attract enough attention to make it through Greenlight — usually based on nothing more than the *promise* of a game — and you're pretty much guaranteed a spot in the store.

To achieve this, they've set the quality bar *ludicrously* low.  Many recent games just take a stock game engine, throw some store-bought assets around, slap on some textures they nicked from Google Images, maybe add some in-game notes on how to work around the bugs they couldn't fix, and try to sell the whole thing for $10, $15, or more.  (If you're curious how low they can go, check out Jim Sterling's [Squirty Play series][squirty] and prepare to "wtf?" a lot.)

This isn't even counting the publisher back-catalogues.  At some point, Valve decided that if you were a publisher with an existing Steam relationship, you could dump your entire history of games into the store.  *You didn't even have to tell anyone they were old games!*  The "New Releases" frontpage section became useless overnight, and never recovered.

Steam also sells *POSTAL*, a two-part game series (1997 and 2003) that ostensibly does the exact same thing as *Hatred*.  You play as a psychotic killer who is "going postal" and murdering a town of civilians.  Sure, the motivation here is less misanthropy, more mental illness — but it's not like the *Hatred* protagonist is playing with a full deck, either.

So, like everyone else, I wondered: Why is Valve taking a stand *now*, after letting all this meritless "shovelware" onto Steam?  Why is *POSTAL* okay, but not *Hatred*?  And, perhaps most importantly, should Valve really be trying to police the theme of its games?

Judging from the discussion threads online, that last point is what seemed to rile people up the most.  Many of today's gamers vividly remember Jack Thompson, the wacky (now disbarred) Florida attorney who launched a one-man campaign to (literally) ban the "murder simulators" that we all knew to be harmless, cathartic fun.

Jack was always more comical than he was effective, but there was always the worry that someone *actually* important would listen to him.  And that worry is what comes to the fore when we see Valve blocking *Hatred*, less than two weeks after we saw the ever-popular *Grand Theft Auto 5* pulled from Target and K-Mart shelves in Australia.

So while I wouldn't say I was up in arms about Steam's decision, I also certainly wasn't in favour of it.  At first.

But the more I thought about it, the more I found myself coming around to agreeing with Valve's (original) decision to remove the game — or at least, holding them blameless for it.

## Risky business

Now, it seemed pretty obvious to me that *Hatred* was designed to be controversial.  That first trailer could've been done any number of ways, but they chose to make it as edgy and offensive as they possibly could.  They wanted to be notorious.  They wanted to be controversial.  They wanted to provoke a reaction.

Well, guess what?  They got their reaction.  It just wasn't the one they hoped for.

Controversy has always been a valuable tool in the Swiss Army Knife of Marketing.  The people *doing* the marketing will often tell you that "there's no such thing as bad publicity" — obscurity is usually a much more dangerous enemy than outrage, and unless you make a major miscalculation, you can generally piss off a few people and still be better off for it.

But "generally" doesn't mean "always."  **Controversy is a gamble.**  And like a gambler, sometimes you piss off the wrong people, and a world of hurt comes down on you.

When you become controversial, you force people to make some hard decisions.  You can reasonably expect that some publications will refuse to cover you – the excellent PC gaming site *Rock Paper Shotgun* silently ignored *Hatred* until the Greenlight incident, which was too important to omit — or some stores will refuse to stock you.  Maybe you think you know who will do what, but there's no way to be sure ahead of time.

For one day, it looked like the *Hatred* developers had made a horrible mistake.  *Hatred* was to be banned from the biggest digital platform out there.  And that's a big deal: The PC gaming market pretty much revolves around Steam, and being omitted from their catalogue can truly doom a game to obscurity, moreso than any botched publicity campaign.

Now, in the end, Valve CEO Gabe Newell himself stepped in and decided they'd made the wrong decision.  *Hatred* got everything it could want — they're back on Greenlight, and even though there's still no guarantee they'll be successful, they're already far more well-known and popular than before.  Catastrophe has turned to good fortune, and controversy has once again proven itself to be a powerful marketing tool.

Even so, it's worth remembering how close the *Hatred* gambit came to horribly backfiring, and how they would've had nobody to blame but themselves.

Because that's the risk you take when you willfully court controversy.

[death-threats]: http://www.rockpapershotgun.com/2014/10/21/paranautical-activity-deleted-from-steam/ "Paranautical Activity Pulled From Steam For Death Threats – Rock Paper Shotgun"
[squirty]: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLlRceUcRZcK0zAt8sV33ZsMCVlOgWjVoy "Jim Sterling – Squirty Plays – YouTube"
